A121: RPC Delay Observability (#556)
grpc/proposal: A121-rpc-delay-observability.md

> # A121: RPC Delay Observability

Reviewer: Please remove the `#` here, since this results in (a) a double underline in the formatted view and (b) adding the title to the table of contents, which isn't useful.

Author: done.

----
* Author(s): Madhav Bissa (@mbissa)
* Approver: @markdroth, @ejona86, @dfawley, @easwars
* Implemented in: Go, Java, C++
* Last updated: 2026-06-25
* Discussion at: https://groups.google.com/g/grpc-io/c/NsxXJ2MxXM4

## Abstract

This proposal introduces client-side metrics and tracing to measure the delays an RPC experiences within the client channel before it is sent over the network. In this context, "delay" refers to the time an RPC spends blocked or queued inside the channel waiting for name resolution, configuration parsing, or downstream connection establishment. To expose these states, this document proposes two new histograms, two dedicated tracing spans, and corresponding additions to the CallTracer and CallAttemptTracer APIs.

## Background

Existing gRPC core telemetry infrastructure, as defined in [gRPC A66 (OpenTelemetry Metrics)][A66] and [gRPC A72 (OpenTelemetry Tracing)][A72], tracks the overall end-to-end duration of RPC calls and attempts. However, these metrics and spans function as aggregate buckets that do not decompose latency, leaving delays inside the client channel invisible to operators.

> Before an RPC attempt can be sent over the network, the client channel must perform several operations, including resolving the target name, parsing service configurations, instantiating load balancing policies, and obtaining a connectivity picker. If any of these phases stall—such as during a slow DNS lookup, a Route Lookup Service (RLS) control-plane query, or a Cluster Discovery Service (CDS) metadata fetch—the RPC is delayed. To the application, this appears as high latency or a timeout. However, because current telemetry lacks visibility into these resolution and routing states, developers cannot distinguish between a slow network, a slow backend, or a channel initialization delay. This is particularly challenging for clients using the Route Lookup Service (RLS), where diagnosing RLS-related hangs or isolating whether delays stem from pending route lookups requires manual debugging.

Reviewer: A few comments here:
- Parsing the service config is synchronous and does not impose any delay.  Same thing for instantiating LB policies.  I don't think we should mention either one here, since they're not relevant.
- RLS is not actually a public API and therefore shouldn't be covered too much here.  There should be only one place where we discuss it, which is where we talk about the changes in the RLS LB policy, and we should have a note on that section that says something like "(not a public API, not covered in any gRFC)".

```suggestion
When a gRPC channel is first created, it is in IDLE state, meaning that it has not done name resolution or attempted to connect to any endpoints.  When the application sends an RPC on the channel, the channel will leave IDLE state and attempt to connect.  Any RPCs sent on the channel while it is attempting to connect will be queued until the channel becomes connected, which results in increased latency for these RPCs.  However, because current telemetry lacks visibility into these connecting delays, developers cannot distinguish between a slow network, a slow backend, or a channel initialization delay.
```

Author: Done — rewrote Background using your suggested text and dropped service-config parsing and LB instantiation. RLS is now discussed only in the rls policy section, with the "(not a public API, not covered by any gRFC)" note.

> While there are many potential sources of delay along the client-side pipeline (including interceptor execution, credential fetching, and filter evaluation), this proposal focuses specifically on introducing observability for the two most common bottlenecks: **name resolution** and **load balancing pick** delays. This proposal establishes a generic telemetry framework extensible to other client-side delays in the future.

Reviewer: Interceptor execution and filter evaluation are not relevant.  We care only about things that do network I/O.

Credential fetching is a good example to cite here.  Another example is retry delays.

Author: Done — removed interceptor/filter; now cites credential fetching and retry delays as the other network-I/O sources.

### Related Proposals:
* **[gRPC A66: OpenTelemetry Metrics][A66]**: Establishes base OpenTelemetry metrics.
* **[gRPC A72: OpenTelemetry Tracing][A72]**: Establishes tracing spans and events.
* **[gRPC A56: Priority LB Policy][A56]**: Establishes the priority load balancing policy and child failover mechanics.
* **[gRPC A28: xDS Traffic Splitting and Routing][A28]**: Establishes the `xds_cluster_manager` and `weighted_target` container policies.

## Proposal

> ### 1. Telemetry Schema

Reviewer: General comment: I think there are way too many headings and sub-headings in this doc, to the point where the outline is so noisy that it's very hard to understand the structure of the document.  The organization makes it hard to follow, and there's also a lot of duplication of information across various sections.

I think we should restructure this into a smaller set of headings the describe the design in an order that can be easily understood by the reader, as follows:

- Anatomy of a Delay (describes call vs. attempt, delay type vs delay reason, and general rules for determining when a delay starts and ends)
- Metric Schema (defines the metrics and labels)
- Tracing Schema (defines the trace span and events)
- Call Tracer API changes (describes the new API methods and explains what the caller is responsible for vs. what the call tracer impl is responsible for; can refer back to the metric schema and tracing schema sections above)
- Resolver Delays (covers the channel's behavior for resolver delays, how it interacts with the resolver and the call tracer)
- LB Pick Delays
  - LB Picker API changes
    - (subsections for each individual LB policy, describing what delay types and reasons will be generated by that policy)
  - Channel Behavior for LB pick delays (covers the channel's interaction with the picker and the call tracer, and channel-specific cases like `subchannel_state_mismatch` and `picker_failing_with_wait_for_ready`)

Also, please remove numbers from all of the section and subsection headers.  The outline already shows the nesting, we don't need a number to do this.

Author: Done — restructured into your outline (Anatomy of a Delay / Metric Schema / Tracing Schema / Call Tracer API Changes / Resolver Delays / LB Pick Delays → Picker API + per-policy + Channel Behavior) and removed all section numbers.

To measure client-side delays, we introduce a duration histogram and a dedicated tracing span at the **Call Level** (for name resolution delays), and another histogram and span at the **Attempt Level** (for load balancing pick delays).

We split observability data between low-cardinality metrics and high-cardinality debug tracing across two layers:

1.  **Call Level Observability (Channel-level Delays)**:
    *   **Scope**: Measures delays that occur at the channel level before an individual network attempt is initiated. This is primarily used to observe name resolution and configuration resolution delays.
    *   **Metric**: `grpc.client.call.delay.duration` (Float64 Histogram).

>     *   **Tracing Span**: A child span named **`"Call Delay"`**, created as a child of the main RPC Call span.

Reviewer: Why does the span name need to be different for call-level vs. attempt-level delays?  It should be obvious whether a given delay is call-level or attempt-level based on whether the delay span is nested under the call span or the attempt span.

Author: Agreed — there's now a single span name (Delay); call-level vs attempt-level is distinguished by whether it's nested under the call span or the attempt span.

2.  **Attempt Level Observability (Attempt-level Delays)**:
    *   **Scope**: Measures delays that occur within the lifecycle of a specific RPC attempt, primarily during the load balancing pick loop and connection establishment.
    *   **Metric**: `grpc.client.attempt.delay.duration` (Float64 Histogram).
    *   **Tracing Span**: A child span named **`"Attempt Delay"`**, created as a child of the individual Attempt span.

> #### Span Attributes and Events
> 
> For both layers, a child span is created for each distinct `grpc.delay_type`, and transitions within that type are recorded as span events:
> 
> *   **`grpc.delay_type` (Span Attribute & Metric Label)**: A low-cardinality, composed string representing the type of the delay. The value format is `[parent_prefix:]base_type` (e.g., `connecting`, `p0:connecting`, or `rls_lookup_pending`). It is recorded as a **span attribute** on the child span and as a **metric label** on the corresponding duration histogram.
> *   **`grpc.delay_reason` (Span Event Attribute)**: A high-cardinality string capturing runtime details (such as target names, subchannel IP addresses, or connection error messages). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each delay will result in a data point being added to the relevant histogram and a new trace span.  Every delay has two attributes:

*   **`grpc.delay_type`**: A low-cardinality string representing the type of the delay. See below for supported values. This value is constant over the lifetime of an individual delay; if the value changes, that implies that the original delay has ended and a new delay has started.  For metrics, this value is used in a metric label.  For tracing, this value is an attribute on the trace span.
*   **`grpc.delay_reason`**: A high-cardinality string capturing runtime details (such as target names, subchannel IP addresses, or connection error messages).  This value can change over the lifetime of a delay.  This value is not used in metrics.  In tracing, this value will be recorded in an event on the trace span.
```

Author: Done — adopted your suggested text in "Anatomy of a Delay."

When a delay begins, the tracer creates the child span (`"Call Delay"` or `"Attempt Delay"`) carrying the `grpc.delay_type` attribute. It also records the initial reason as a span event named `"Delay state transition"` containing the `grpc.delay_reason` string.

If the state changes but the `grpc.delay_type` remains the same (e.g., a priority policy fails over or RLS changes backend targets), the tracer emits a new `"Delay state transition"` span event on the active child span with the updated `grpc.delay_reason` string, without recreating the span.

When the delay resolves or transitions to a different delay type, the active child span is closed.

> #### Span Event Schema Specification

Reviewer: This section shows the event schema but not the schema for the span itself.

To ensure tracing backends can programmatically parse `"Delay state transition"` events, the event MUST conform to the following structural schema:
```json
{
  "name": "Delay state transition",
  "attributes": {

>     "grpc.delay_type": "string (the active delay type, e.g., 'connecting')",

Reviewer: Why do we need this field?  The purpose of this event is to record the delay reason, but the delay type should be constant for the entire span, so it seems like we shouldn't need to record the delay type in each event.

Author: Agreed — removed. The event carries only grpc.delay_reason; delay_type is a span attribute (constant for the span).

    "grpc.delay_reason": "string (the new granular state description)"
  }
}
```

#### Metrics Definitions

The following metrics are registered as client-side per-call metrics, extending the instrumentation framework defined in [gRPC A66][A66].

##### 1. Call Delay Duration Histogram

| Field | Value |
|---|---|
| **Name** | `grpc.client.call.delay.duration` |
| **Type** | Float64 Histogram |
| **Unit** | `s` (seconds) |
| **Description** | EXPERIMENTAL. Time an RPC spent waiting at the call level before an attempt was initiated, such as waiting for name resolution. |
| **Labels** | `grpc.target`, `grpc.delay_type` |

> | **Optional Labels** | `grpc.method` |

Reviewer: Why is the method label optional?  I think it's a required label on all of the A66 metrics.

Author: Fixed — grpc.method is now a required label on both histograms.

| **Bucket Boundaries** | Same as A66 latency buckets: 0, 0.00001, 0.00005, 0.0001, 0.0003, 0.0006, 0.0008, 0.001, 0.002, 0.003, 0.004, 0.005, 0.006, 0.008, 0.01, 0.013, 0.016, 0.02, 0.025, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05, 0.065, 0.08, 0.1, 0.13, 0.16, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.65, 0.8, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100 |
| **Default Enabled** | `false` (experimental, opt-in) |

##### 2. Attempt Delay Duration Histogram

| Field | Value |
|---|---|
| **Name** | `grpc.client.attempt.delay.duration` |
| **Type** | Float64 Histogram |
| **Unit** | `s` (seconds) |
| **Description** | EXPERIMENTAL. Time an RPC attempt spent waiting for a load balancing pick or connection establishment. |
| **Labels** | `grpc.target`, `grpc.delay_type` |

> | **Optional Labels** | `grpc.method` |

Reviewer: Same question here: Why is this label optional?

Author: Fixed — grpc.method is now a required label on both histograms.

| **Bucket Boundaries** | Same as A66 latency buckets: 0, 0.00001, 0.00005, 0.0001, 0.0003, 0.0006, 0.0008, 0.001, 0.002, 0.003, 0.004, 0.005, 0.006, 0.008, 0.01, 0.013, 0.016, 0.02, 0.025, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05, 0.065, 0.08, 0.1, 0.13, 0.16, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.65, 0.8, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100 |
| **Default Enabled** | `false` (experimental, opt-in) |

> ### 2. Delay Types & Reasons

Reviewer: Instead of defining all delay types and reasons in a single section like this and dividing them up into fairly arbitrary categories, I think we should instead have a section for each LB policy and for the channel, indicating which delay types will be reported by each piece of code, and showing examples of delay reasons for each one.

See my comment above for suggested organization.

Author: Done — delay types and example reasons are now defined per policy (and for the channel). I also added a small summary table of the base delay_type values for reference, which points back to those sections.

#### 1. Metric Delay Types (`grpc.delay_type`)
The `grpc.delay_type` label is a low-cardinality, restricted set of values. These types are partitioned into Call-Level and Attempt-Level scopes, corresponding to their respective duration histograms. Structural container policies may compose the attempt-level values by prepending logical prefixes.

##### 1. Call-Level Delay Types
Recorded on the `grpc.client.call.delay.duration` histogram. These represent delays that occur before an individual attempt is created:
*   `"resolving"`: The channel is delayed waiting for name resolution.

##### 2. Attempt-Level Delay Types
Recorded on the `grpc.client.attempt.delay.duration` histogram. These represent delays that occur during a specific RPC attempt:
*   `"connecting"`: The attempt is delayed waiting for subchannel connection establishment or picker initialization.
*   `"rls_lookup_pending"`: Specifically for Route Lookup Service (RLS) control-plane cache-miss query lookups.

> *   `"cds_dynamic_discovery"`: Specifically for xDS Cluster Discovery Service (CDS) dynamic metadata resource fetches.

Reviewer: This should reference A61.

Author: Added. I placed it in the pick_first/connecting section, since A61 (IPv4/IPv6 dualstack) is about the connection attempts

*   `"subchannel_state_mismatch"`: The target subchannel transitioned out of `READY` (e.g., disconnected or went to `TRANSIENT_FAILURE`), but the active channel picker has not yet been updated with a new picker. *Note: This delay type is generated by the channel intercepting a stale pick, not by the picker itself.*

> *   `"picker_failing_with_wait_for_ready"`: A `wait_for_ready` RPC is buffered/queued because the picker is in `TRANSIENT_FAILURE`, waiting for the next connection attempt to succeed. *Note: This delay type is generated by the channel wrapper detecting a `wait_for_ready` RPC when the picker returns an error, keeping pickers ignorant of `wait_for_ready` semantics.*

Reviewer: In several places, the document uses the term "channel wrapper".  I'm not sure what that means.  I think it should just say "channel" instead.

Author: Done.

##### 3. Composed Attempt-Level Types
Structural container policies prepend their logical prefixes to the base attempt-level types using a colon separator:
*   **Priority Policy**: Prepends the active priority tier index, resulting in composed types like:
    *   `p0:connecting`
*   **Pass-Through Container Policies**: Policies like `xds_cluster_manager`, `weighted_target`, and `rls` **do not prepend any prefix or wrap the delay type**. They bubble up the child's `grpc.delay_type` (e.g., `"connecting"`) as-is.

> Because only the priority policy contributes a prefix and it contributes exactly one (its active tier index), the resulting `grpc.delay_type` cardinality stays bounded; prefixes do not stack across nested pass-through containers. Implementations should keep the prefix a small bounded token (the tier index) so metric cardinality remains low; detailed per-container structure belongs in the `grpc.delay_reason` span event, not the metric label.

Reviewer: Instead of "tier index", please say "numeric priority".

Author: Done

1.  **Leaf Pickers** (such as `pick_first` or `round_robin`): Generate the base delay types (e.g., `delay_type = "connecting"`) and the initial `delay_reason` (e.g., `"subchannel connecting: TCP handshake in progress"`).
2.  **Container Pickers**: Intercept the child's deferred pick result as it bubbles up the picker tree. The `priority` picker prepends its active tier index to the type (e.g., producing `"p0:connecting"`). A pass-through picker (such as `xds_cluster_manager`) forwards the child's `delay_type` unmodified, but can add its own structural details to the `delay_reason`.
3.  **The Channel Wrapper**: Receives the composed `delay_type` and `delay_reason` strings from the root picker and passes them to the tracer (`recordAttemptDelayStart`) for a single delay_type segment (which is identified by a change in the delay_type value). The channel wrapper is also responsible for intercepting specific channel-level states (e.g., generating `"picker_failing_with_wait_for_ready"` when a picker returns an error for a `wait_for_ready` RPC, or `"subchannel_state_mismatch"` when a transport disconnects before the picker is updated).

> ---

Reviewer: Please remove.

Author: Removed — the composition-mechanics section is gone; that behavior is now folded into the priority section and "Channel Behavior for LB Pick Delays."

*   **CDS Metadata Fetch**: An xDS channel is waiting for dynamic CDS cluster resource definitions. The reason string describes the dynamic discovery request and can include the targeted cluster name (e.g., `"waiting for CDS resource definition for cluster cluster_abc"`).

##### Category C: Subchannel Connection Scenarios (Type: `"connecting"`)
Recorded when an RPC attempt is queued waiting for a subchannel to establish a transport:
*   **Idle Subchannel Trigger**: The picker selects a subchannel that is in `IDLE` state, triggering a new connection attempt. The reason string captures this transition (e.g., `"subchannel was idle, triggering connection attempt"`).
*   **Active TCP/TLS Handshake**: The subchannel is actively connecting. The reason string describes that the TCP or TLS handshake is in progress, and can include the target subchannel's remote address (e.g., `"subchannel connecting: TCP handshake in progress to 192.168.1.50:8080"`).

> *   **A105 Connection Scaling**: Per gRFC A105, an established subchannel connection is scaling up to add additional connections to satisfy high concurrent streams. The reason string captures this scaling state (e.g., `"scaling up additional subchannel connections per A105 limits"`).

Reviewer: This design includes only resolver and LB pick delays, so subchannel connection scaling delays are not in scope.

Author: Removed — connection scaling is out of scope.

*   **Waiting for Health Report**: The physical transport connection is established, but the picker is blocked waiting for the initial Out-of-Band (OOB) health check stream to return `SERVING` (e.g., `"transport connected, waiting for initial health check report"`).
*   **Subchannel Non-Existence**: The load balancer has not yet created or resolved the target subchannel. The reason string describes the missing subchannel state.
*   **Round Robin / WRR Scenarios**: The policy is connecting because it is waiting for any of its configured subchannels to become ready. The reason string describes the policy's connectivity attempt and can list the subchannels being attempted.
*   **Ring Hash Scenarios**: The hash ring is waiting for subchannels in the ring to connect. The reason string describes that the ring is connecting and can list the specific ring nodes being attempted.

> *   **xDS Override Host Scenarios**: The policy is attempting to connect to a specific overridden host (subchannel) but the host is not yet connected. The reason string explains the overridden host state.

Reviewer: This should reference A55, A60, and A75.

Author: Added — the xds_override_host section now references A55, A60, and A75.

##### Category F: Pass-Through Container Policy Scenarios (Type: `"connecting"` bubbled up directly)
Policies like `xds_cluster_manager`, `weighted_target`, and `rls` do not modify the metric `grpc.delay_type` (it remains strictly `"connecting"` or whatever leaf type is bubbled up from the child).
However, to provide visibility in tracing, the parent container policy's structural details (such as the target cluster name, RLS route shard, or weight group) are recorded inside the trace event's free-form description or as span attributes (e.g., `"waiting for child cluster 'cluster-abc' to connect"`).

### 3. Telemetry API

#### Lifecycle & State Machine

The client channel, load balancer, and telemetry tracer coordinate synchronously to record delays during routing.

##### 1. Timer Orchestration

> The channel owns the **lifecycle** of a delay segment (deciding when it starts, transitions, and ends) while the telemetry plugin owns the **timing** of that segment (it timestamps the start on `recordDelayStart`, computes the elapsed duration on `recordDelayEnd`, and emits the histogram). The channel therefore does not maintain a separate duration clock; "logical timer" below refers to this plugin-side measurement, delimited by the channel's start/end signals.

Reviewer: This can be covered in the section about the call tracer API.

Author: Moved — now under "Call Tracer API Changes" (caller vs. tracer-impl responsibilities).

*   **LB Picker (Attempt-Level Delay)**: When an RPC attempt is initiated, the picker executes. If the picker defers the pick (i.e. it cannot return a ready connection yet), it surfaces the metric delay type (e.g., `"connecting"`) and the free-form debug reason alongside the existing "no connection available" signal. The channel's attempt-routing wrapper invokes `recordAttemptDelayStart(type, reason)` to open the `"Attempt Delay"` child span. As the attempt remains buffered, subsequent picker evaluations may return different reasons, which the channel updates using `recordAttemptDelayReasonChanged(reason)` to append span events. When a picker evaluation successfully assigns a subchannel, the channel invokes `recordAttemptDelayEnd()`.

> *   **Scope Resolution**: The decision of whether a delay segment is Call-Level (recorded to `grpc.client.call.delay.duration`) or Attempt-Level (recorded to `grpc.client.attempt.delay.duration`) is determined entirely by the scope of the tracer object on which the callbacks are invoked. Call-level delays (such as `"resolving"`) are invoked strictly on the call-scoped tracer object, while attempt-level delays (such as `"connecting"`) are invoked strictly on the attempt-scoped tracer object. This mapping is enforced statically by the respective language API signatures.

Reviewer: Rather than calling this out as a general principle, I think we should just cover this in the section that talks about the channel's behavior for both resolution delays and LB pick delays.

Author: Done — dropped the general-principle framing; the channel's behavior is covered directly in "Resolver Delays" and "Channel Behavior for LB Pick Delays."

> ##### 2. Emission

Reviewer: The info here should be moved to the section defining the call tracer API changes.

Author: Moved — the scope-determines-histogram rule is now in "Call Tracer API Changes."

Both metric duration recording and trace span management are delegated to the registered telemetry plugin (e.g., OpenTelemetry) via the tracer API:
*   **Span Lifecycle**: Upon receiving the `recordDelayStart` signal, the telemetry plugin instantiates the child trace span. Subsequent `recordDelayReasonChanged` calls append `"Delay state transition"` events to the active span.
*   **Simultaneous Metric & Span Close**: Upon receiving the `recordDelayEnd` signal, the telemetry plugin **simultaneously ends the child trace span and emits the final duration metric** to the corresponding duration histogram (`grpc.client.call.delay.duration` or `grpc.client.attempt.delay.duration`), measuring the elapsed time of the logical timer.

##### 3. Cancellation & Timeout
If an active RPC call or attempt is cancelled (due to client cancellation, `DEADLINE_EXCEEDED` timeouts, or channel shutdown) while a delay is logically active:

> *   The core channel **MUST** invoke the tracer's end callback (`recordCallDelayEnd()` or `recordAttemptDelayEnd()`), which finalizes the plugin-side timing for the open segment. 

Reviewer: Do we actually need to explicitly close the span in this case?  Note that when the RPC is cancelled or hits its deadline, we are already notifying the call tracer about that.  We could just say that if there's an open delay when the call gets cancelled, the call tracer will automatically terminate it, updating both metrics and tracing accordingly.

Author: Good point — no. The doc now says that if a delay is open when the RPC is cancelled or times out, the call tracer terminates it automatically (updating metrics and tracing); the channel doesn't explicitly close it.

*   This ensures the telemetry plugin can capture the elapsed duration up to the point of failure, close the trace span, and emit the partial duration metric, guaranteeing that bottlenecks preceding a failure remain observable.

> ##### 4. Retries & Hedging

Reviewer: I think this section can just be removed.  The structure it describes already exists and isn't something new in this design.

Author: Removed

###### Per-runtime binding
The binding *mechanism* is asymmetric because each runtime's current telemetry API differs; only the six logical operations and their two scopes are common. This asymmetry is inherent to the existing APIs, not a difference in the delay design itself:
*   **Go**: introduces a **new** call-scoped and attempt-scoped tracer API (gRPC-Go's V2 stats handler). A new API is required because the V1 `stats.Handler` is attempt-scoped only and cannot host a call-level hook. The broader V2 API is out of scope here beyond the delay hooks it must expose.
*   **Java**: **reuses the existing tracer types** but adds new no-op-default methods to them — attempt hooks on `ClientStreamTracer`, call hooks on `ClientStreamTracer.Factory` — and reuses the existing name-resolution-delay plumbing (`ClientStreamTracer.NAME_RESOLUTION_DELAYED` and the `createPendingStream()` callback) for the `"resolving"` segment. The attempt-level `"connecting"` delay is recorded directly on the attempt-scoped `ClientStreamTracer` instance.

> *   **C++ (Core)**: **reuses the existing annotation framework**, adding only a new `DelayAnnotation` subtype that replaces the current free-form `"Delayed name resolution complete."` / `"Delayed LB pick complete."` string annotations.

Reviewer: I don't think we can do this via simple annotations.  I think we'll instead add new methods to the call tracer API.

Author: Done — C++ now adds new methods to the call and attempt tracer interfaces instead of using annotations.

      : Annotation(CallTracerAnnotationInterface::AnnotationType::kDelay),
        stage_(stage), type_(type), reason_(reason) {}

  Stage stage() const { return stage_; }
  absl::string_view type() const { return type_; }
  absl::string_view reason() const { return reason_; }

  // Both overrides are required: the base Annotation declares them pure-virtual.
  std::string ToString() const override;
  void ForEachKeyValue(
      absl::FunctionRef<void(absl::string_view, ValueType)> callback)
      const override;

 private:
  const Stage stage_;
  const std::string type_;    // owned (not a string_view) to avoid dangling
  const std::string reason_;  // owned
};

}  // namespace grpc_core
```
A new `AnnotationType::kDelay` is added to the annotation-type enum (before the trailing `kDoNotUse_MustBeLast` sentinel). The OpenTelemetry plugin reads `stage()`/`type()`/`reason()` to open, update, and close the delay child span.

### Feature Flag

All delay metrics, tracing, and API hooks will be guarded by a feature flag:
* **Go/Java Env Var**: `GRPC_EXPERIMENTAL_ENABLE_DELAY_OBSERVABILITY` (Default: `false`)

> * **C++ Core Experiment**: register `client_delay_observability` in `experiments.yaml`; gate via the generated `IsClientDelayObservabilityEnabled()` accessor (core uses generated per-experiment accessors, not string-keyed lookups).

Reviewer: I don't think we need any env var guard for this, since the new functionality is going to be configured locally instead of being triggered by remote input.

(Also, if we did need an env var guard, we'd use the same approach in C-core rather than using our experiment framework, so that interop tests have a single way to enable them across all languages.)

Author: Done — removed the env-var guard. The metrics remain experimental/off-by-default via the standard OTel per-metric enablement.

## Metric Registration and Recording

> Metric registration and recording will follow the established architectural patterns defined in [gRPC A66][A66] and [gRPC A94][A94]. The channel and attempts will delegate duration measurement directly to the registered telemetry plugin (e.g., OpenTelemetry) to avoid code duplication across the core stack. The specific plugin API registrations are omitted here for brevity but will conform to language-idiomatic OTel APIs (e.g., `RegisterFloat64Histo` in Go, `registerDoubleHistogram` in Java, and `RegisterDoubleHistogram` in C++).

Reviewer: I'm not sure what this is actually saying.  Isn't this already implicit in the design described above?

I'm also not sure why this is referencing A94, since that doesn't seem relevant here.

Author: Removed the "Metric Registration and Recording" section (and the A94 reference) — agreed it was already implicit in the design above.

# A121: RPC Delay Observability
----
* Author(s): Madhav Bissa (@mbissa)
* Approver: @markdroth, @ejona86, @dfawley, @easwars
* Implemented in: Go, Java, C++

> * Last updated: 2026-06-19

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be today ??

Author: Updated.

We split observability data between low-cardinality metrics and high-cardinality debug tracing across two layers:

1.  **Call Level Observability (Channel-level Delays)**:
    *   **Scope**: Measures delays that occur at the channel level before an individual network attempt is initiated. This is primarily used to observe name resolution and configuration resolution delays.
    *   **Metric**: `grpc.client.call.delay.duration` (Float64 Histogram).
    *   **Tracing Span**: A child span named **`"Call Delay"`**, created as a child of the main RPC Call span.
2.  **Attempt Level Observability (Attempt-level Delays)**:
    *   **Scope**: Measures delays that occur within the lifecycle of a specific RPC attempt, primarily during the load balancing pick loop and connection establishment.
    *   **Metric**: `grpc.client.attempt.delay.duration` (Float64 Histogram).
    *   **Tracing Span**: A child span named **`"Attempt Delay"`**, created as a child of the individual Attempt span.

#### Span Attributes and Events

> For both layers, a child span is created for each distinct `grpc.delay_type`, and transitions within that type are recorded as span events:

Reviewer 2: For each consecutively distinct right (i.e. whenever the delay_type value changes) ?

Reviewer 2: Nevermind, saw the relevant section below

##### 2. Attempt Delay Duration Histogram

| Field | Value |
|---|---|
| **Name** | `grpc.client.attempt.delay.duration` |
| **Type** | Float64 Histogram |
| **Unit** | `s` (seconds) |
| **Description** | EXPERIMENTAL. Time an RPC attempt spent waiting for a load balancing pick or connection establishment. |
| **Labels** | `grpc.target`, `grpc.delay_type` |
| **Optional Labels** | `grpc.method` |
| **Bucket Boundaries** | Same as A66 latency buckets: 0, 0.00001, 0.00005, 0.0001, 0.0003, 0.0006, 0.0008, 0.001, 0.002, 0.003, 0.004, 0.005, 0.006, 0.008, 0.01, 0.013, 0.016, 0.02, 0.025, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05, 0.065, 0.08, 0.1, 0.13, 0.16, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.65, 0.8, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100 |
| **Default Enabled** | `false` (experimental, opt-in) |

### 2. Delay Types & Reasons

To ensure consistency across implementations, we define the taxonomy of metric and tracing labels. 

All connection-related delays are consolidated into a single low-cardinality metric label value (`"connecting"`), while their detailed reasons are recorded inside the `"Delay state transition"` span event (as the `grpc.delay_reason` event attribute).

#### 1. Metric Delay Types (`grpc.delay_type`)

> The `grpc.delay_type` label is a low-cardinality, restricted set of values. To ensure maximum clarity, these types are explicitly partitioned into Call-Level and Attempt-Level scopes, corresponding to their respective duration histograms. Structural container policies may compose the attempt-level values by prepending logical prefixes.

Reviewer 2: "Structural container policies may compose the attempt-level values by prepending logical prefixes."
Does this depend upon the implementor ?

Reviewer 2: Nevermind, Saw the relevant section below

##### 3. Composed Attempt-Level Types
Structural container policies prepend their logical prefixes to the base attempt-level types using a colon separator:
*   **Priority Policy**: Prepends the active priority tier index, resulting in composed types like:
    *   `p0:connecting`
    *   `p1:subchannel_state_mismatch`
    *   `p0:picker_failing_with_wait_for_ready`
*   **Pass-Through Container Policies**: Policies like `xds_cluster_manager`, `weighted_target`, and `rls` **do not prepend any prefix or wrap the delay type**. They simply bubble up the child's `grpc.delay_type` (e.g., `"connecting"`) directly as-is.

##### Metadata Propagation & Composition
The prepending and wrapping logic is handled entirely inside the Balancer Picker tree hierarchy, keeping the channel's attempt-routing wrapper and tracer plugins completely decoupled and simple:

> 1.  **Leaf Pickers** (such as `pick_first` or `round_robin`): Generate the base leaf types (e.g., `delay_type = "connecting"`) and the initial, descriptive `delay_reason` (e.g., `"subchannel connecting: TCP handshake in progress"`).

Reviewer 2: "Generate the base leaf types" -> "Generate the base delay types"

Structural container policies prepend their logical prefixes to the base attempt-level types using a colon separator:
*   **Priority Policy**: Prepends the active priority tier index, resulting in composed types like:
    *   `p0:connecting`
*   **Pass-Through Container Policies**: Policies like `xds_cluster_manager`, `weighted_target`, and `rls` **do not prepend any prefix or wrap the delay type**. They bubble up the child's `grpc.delay_type` (e.g., `"connecting"`) as-is.

> Because only the priority policy contributes a prefix and it contributes exactly one (its active tier index), the resulting `grpc.delay_type` cardinality stays bounded; prefixes do not stack across nested pass-through containers. Implementations should keep the prefix a small bounded token (the tier index) so metric cardinality remains low; detailed per-container structure belongs in the `grpc.delay_reason` span event, not the metric label.

Reviewer 2: We are not gonna limit the nesting for priority policies right(as in px:py:pz.....:connecting ) ??

Author: correct, fixed.
